# Bootstrapping Trust

## Part 4: Certificate Authorities & Chains of Trust

If you have read through the entire series up to here, welcome! If you
have not, please consider reading the whole series:

- [Part 1: Encryption Everywhere](./part-01.encryption-everywhere.md)
- [Part 2: A Primer On Public-Key Cryptography](./part-02.a-primer-on-public-key-cryptography.md)
- [Part 3: Certificates](./part-03.certificates.md)
- [Part 4: Certificate Authorities & Chains Of Trust](./part-04.certificate-authorities-and-chains-of-trust.md)
- [Part 5: Bootstrapping Trust](./part-05.bootstrapping-trust.md)


### Root & Intermediate Certificate Authorities (CAs)

Not all certificates are the same! Certificates have different
capabilities depending on their usage attributes and extensions. The
previous article in this series mentioned a few of those attributes and
extensions. Two of those were `clientAuth`, for client certificates, and
`serverAuth`, for server certificates, which play an essential role in
how a certificate is used during network authentication negotiations.
These roles are crucial, as they are a contract for what attributes and
extensions should be included in the certificate to make it useful. For
example, a server certificate usually finds it useful to include Subject
Alternate Names (SANs). One usage of this is to tie a certificate to a
specific domain name (like ziti.dev). However, a client certificate will
not have use for those same fields.

The roles of certificates and the attributes/extensions they have are
not always strictly followed. Some systems, such as some web browsers,
require SANs on a server certificate (at the time of writing in 2020).
That wasn't always the case. Before that, the Common Name fields in the
subject information contained the domain name. Some systems still rely
on that convention.

Another type of certificate is a Certificate Authority's certificate. A
CA is a key pair with a certificate that has a unique purpose: to sign
other certificates. They have a special CA flag set to "true." This flag
alone does not grant the CA certificate any power, but if a system
trusts that CA, it then allows that system to trust any certificate that
CA has signed. As mentioned in previous parts of this series, trusting a
CA is a software or operating system configuration process. This process
can be done in multiple ways depending on the system: adding it to a
store, a specific folder, or adding lines to a configuration file.

Your operating system, right now, has its own set of trusted CAs. Most
operating systems come with a default list installed and maintained by
your OS developer. Over time this list is added to and removed from as
trust is granted or withdrawn. Some pieces of software come with a list
of CAs that are used instead of or in addition to the OS's CAs. The
power of a CA comes not by its creation but by it being trusted.

CAs come in two flavors: Root CAs and Intermediate CAs. Root CAs are the
egg or the chicken (depending on your viewpoint) of the CA trust
chicken-and-egg problem. Trust for CAs has to start somewhere. With CAs
it is the Root CA. A Root CA can sign certificates that are themselves
CAs as well. Those certificates represent Intermediate CAs. Layers of
CAs starting with a root and adding intermediates along the way allows
the private key for the Root CA's private key can be kept in a highly
secure environment, which is not convenient to use for signing. This
security means that the Root CA has a far less likely chance of having
its private key compromised. Intermediate CAs are put into less secure
environments and, if compromised, can be revoked. Trust is usually put
into the Root CA, and since it was not compromised can remain trusted.
The compromised intermediate can be. Since compromised intermediates
should be rare, there is less information to distribute about who not to
trust rather than who to trust from a particular Root CA.

Running a public CA is serious business if you wish to be publicly
trusted. The organization has to have strict protocols that verify the
security and safe handling of the CAs private keys. If the private key
is compromised, it can be used to sign other certificates for malicious
intents. Any system that trusted the CA will now trust any of the
maliciously signed certificates. This can, and most likely will,
compromise all encryption on all connections that trusted the CA.

Public CAs are maintained by organizations such as DigiCert, Let's
Encrypt, and others. Anyone can also create private CAs. The only
difference is that the number of systems that trust a private CA is much
smaller than that of a public one. CAs are a cornerstone of
bootstrapping trust in a software system public or private.

### Chains of Trust & PKIs

Part three of this series introduced that certificates could be signed
by itself or another certificate. Certificates are usually signed via
Certificate Signing Requests (CSRs). A certificate signing itself is
called a "self-signed certificate" and is an indicator of it being a
root CA if the CA flag is also set to true. A root CA can sign other
certificates with the CA flag set to true, and those become intermediate
CAs. Any CA, root or intermediate, that fulfills a CSR and signs the
enclosed certificate will generate a non-CA certificate as long as the
CA flag is false. These certificates are leaf certificates.

Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) is used to describe the output of
configuring and generating all of the CAs and processes needed to
create, manage, and verify trust for leaf certificates.

Consider the following PKI setup:

- Two root CAs:
  - Root A
  - Root B
- The root CAs each sign an intermediate CA via CSR:
  - Intermediate A
  - Intermediate B
- A server wishes to have a certificate to have Root A's trust extended
  to it.
  - A key pair is generated
- A CSR is created and submitted to Intermediate A to sign
- The CSR is fulfilled.
  - Server Cert A is created and signed by Intermediate A which is in
    turn signed by Root A

Visually this would appear as follows:

<img src="./images/chains.png" style="width: 50%; margin: 0 auto; display: block;">

This PKI has two chains of trust: Chain A and Chain B. They are called
chains because the signatures link the certificates together. Root A has
signed Intermediate A's certificate and Intermediate A has signed Server
A certificate. Programmatically we can traverse these signatures and
verify them using the public certificates of each signatory. Trusting
Root A will trust Server A. Trusting Intermediate A will also trust
Server A.

The second chain, Chain B, does not sign any of the certificates on
Chain A. As expected, Trusting either of the CAs from Chain B does not
grant andy trust to the certificates on Chain A. Chain B highlights the
fact that the world, a PKI, and any system may have multiple chains of
trust that do not interact in any fashion.

Returning to Chain A, trusting Intermediate A designates it as a "trust
anchor." Any certificate can be a trust anchor. The certificate used as
a trust anchor determines which certificates will additionally be
trusted. A leaf certificate as a trust anchor only trusts that one
certificate. Trusting a CA trusts all certificates that it has signed
itself or any of its intermediates.

- Trusting Server Cert A will only trust that one server certificate.
- Trusting Intermediate A will trust Server Cert A and any other
  certificate it signs
- Trust Root A will trust Intermediate A and Server Cert A and any other
  certificate Root A signs (intermediate CA or not) and in turn, any of
  the certificates they sign

Trusting a CA that has signed many certificates allows public
certificate trust to scale. This is how trust scales for web traffic.
Companies like DigiCert, IdenTrust, GoDaddy, etc. have their root CA or
one of their large intermediate CAs trusted. Those CAs sign certificates
for websites. All of our devices trust those website certificates
because the CA has signed them.

### Distributed Systems & CAs

The goal for any distributed system should be to have certificates
verified on both sides: clients verify servers and vice versa.
Verification is done on every connection before any data exchange. Over
TLS, which secures HTTPS, this would be "mutual TLS" or "mTLS." Most
public websites do not require mTLS. Instead, they use TLS with the
client validating the server. For public web traffic, the server wishes
to be trusted widely. The reverse is not necessary. If it is, websites
use an additional form of authentications, like usernames and passwords,
to verify the client's identity. Public key cryptography is a stronger
authentication mechanism, but it is also difficult for the general
public to set up, manage, and maintain.

The same is true for distributed systems. Most don't secure anything at
all or only verify servers. It is inherently secure and can cause issues
depending on the setup of the system. Ziti is a distributed system that
abstracts away this security setup for both its internal routers and
client-owned endpoints/SDKs. This setup allows application-specific
networking with strong identity verification, powerful policy
management, flexible mesh routing, and more. The goal of this article is
to focus on bootstrapping trust. So in the
[last article](./part-05.bootstrapping-trust.md), let us see how all of
this comes together.

---

Written By: Andrew Martinez  
June 2020
